Introduction
I built this Python project for Formula 1
fans, and it's racked up over 1 million views on social media.
So I thought, I'd make this video
to introduce you to the project, explain what it is, how I built it,
and where you can download it so that you can have a go for yourself.
Let's get into it.
What the project does
F1 Race Replay is a Python application used for visualizing Formula 1 telemetry
and replaying race events from above, so you can get a complete view
of what's happening in the race.
It also allows you to review qualifying data and car telemetry.
So I will explain that in this video as well.
It's an open source project, meaning that you can download
the code and make changes to it and use it for whatever you like.
All I ask is that if you do use the project publicly
for whatever purpose that you want to use it for, please
you leave a link back to the original project
so that you can credit both myself and also the other contributors.
How to download and set it up
You can download the code by visiting the GitHub repository,
and then either running git clone in your terminal
or downloading it as a zip file, and then unpacking it as normal.
You’ll need to open the code inside of your favourite code editor,
and then set up a Python virtual environment and install the dependencies.
This is how you set up an environment on a Mac, but the process might differ
slightly if you're using Windows or Linux or whatever you want to use.
To run the tool, you'll need to run Python main.py and then use the year
and round arguments to select the race that you want to watch.
You can check the round number by visiting the F1 website,
and then going on to their schedule and having a look at the round number
relevant to the race that you want to find, if that makes sense.
When you run that command,
the Python application will start and it will need to go and preprocess
all of that data to get all the telemetry synced up and do all the magic
that I've coded to make it do what it needs to do,
which will take maybe a minute or two.
So do be patient.
But then once it's ready, it will show the interface.
Feature walkthrough
So now that it's running, let me give you a quick walkthrough of the features.
As you can see, the race that we've chosen is now being run on screen.
And each of these dots is a driver going around the track.
We can pause, speed up, slow down the replay using the spacebar and arrow keys.
And we can also go frame by frame using the left and right arrow keys.
Oh, and we can also press R to restart the race On the right here
we have the leaderboard which currently displays
the order of the drivers during the race, as well as their tyre compounds
that they are currently using.
If you click on a driver,
you will see more insights into their telemetry, such as the speed,
gear that they are currently in, whether or not they have DRS open, etc..
In the top left we can see the lap number that we're currently on, the length
of the race so far and the speed that we are watching the race at.
And just below that we have the weather data, which changes throughout the race.
Oh, and finally when we get a yellow flag, red flag, safety car, virtual safety
car, the track changes colour and we get a nice bit of text
in the top left here telling us.
Qualifying mode
Since writing the script for this video, I have also added a new feature
that shows qualifying.
It allows you to review the telemetry that's coming off of the cars,
so that you can see exactly what's happening in a driver’s qualifying lap.
All we have to do to access this
feature is past the qualifying argument when you run the Python project
and instead of the race view appearing, you get this leaderboard screen.
Using this leaderboard screen, you can then select the driver
and their lap time from the different qualifying segments.
For example, this is Lando Norris’s qualifying lap for Abu Dhabi 2025.
The telemetry is being animated onto the screen as the car
goes around the track, with this line representing his speed,
this one is the gear changes and these two are throttle and braking.
So this tool gives you a pretty decent insight into what's happening in the race.
But how does it work?
How it works under the hood
The entire project is built using Python, and as of today,
the only data source is the FastF1 Python package.
If you haven't heard of it before, FastF1 is a fantastic free Python package
that enables you to access tons of F1 data
like driver info, session results, telemetry and much, much more.
So if you're an F1 fan working with Python,
I definitely recommend that you check out the FastF1 Python package,
just maybe for a hobby project or who knows what you will build.
Now, in order to display the drivers all going around the track all synced up
together, I have had to spend a lot of time writing functions
for importing the data and syncing it up to the same timeline,
but without the Python package sitting in front of its source API,
this would have been a much
more complicated process, so I'm very grateful to use that package.
Now for the interface,
we're using the Arcade Python package, which is primarily meant for games,
but is actually a really good solution if you want to create
an animated sequence or animated interface like this one here.
I did initially use matplotlib, but it didn't have that
spark, that fancy feeling when I rendered the video.
I think we can all agree that the Arcade version is better.
Community contributions
Now, while I do want to point out that the initial versions
of this project were built by me, since then we've added a lot of features,
and because it's open source, a lot of people have contributed
their own work to it.
For example, the weather feature was written
by this developer, the lap number was written by this person,
and the window resize feature was written by this developer.
There are a few other contributors that I haven't named,
but if you go into the contributors.md file in the open source repository,
you'll be able to see all of them credited for the work that they have done.
And to anyone else that contributes to the project, thank you very much.
A lot of people have been asking me about the future of this project,
and before I get into that, I just want to say that I had no idea
that it would actually blow up to the scale that it has done.
Future roadmap
with any of my other projects, I would simply build a new feature.
If I wanted to add a new feature, add it to the public repository, and that's it.
But with the amount of public interest that this project has received,
I think it's only right
that I do it properly by creating much more of a defined roadmap
so that other developers can get involved and help to build features
without necessarily straying too far from what I want the project to be.
ultimately the goal here is to build
the best data insights tool that we possibly can for Formula 1 fans
so that they can explore the data behind their favourite sport.
This means that every single feature needs to achieve two goals, one delivering
as much data
as possible around that specific metric that we're trying to communicate,
and two being really easy to understand and digestible
if you're someone who maybe isn't too technical,
but wants to learn more about the data behind Formula 1.
So here are the primary goals that I have for the next few weeks of developing
this project.
First, implementing a graphical user interface
that allows the user to be able to find the specific race that they want to watch
and watch the specific session without having to go onto the F1 website,
look for the round number, and then put that into the terminal
to run a command, which then launches a Python application.
Even just talking about it, it sounds like a terrible user experience.
So I really need to improve that.
Next adding support for qualifying and practice sessions.
Now you're probably thinking, Tom, you've already shown us qualifying sessions
in this video.
Well, I wrote this roadmap before I built that feature.
And then I thought, well,
I need to include it in this video because it's a pretty cool feature.
So that's already one item checked partially off of the roadmap.
Although I do think there are many things
that I can do to improve that feature, and make it a bit more informative
in terms of adding in sector times or for example, comparison tools.
Which brings me on to the next point.
In order to measure a driver's
performance, as I said earlier, you really do need to be able
to compare them with another driver or another lap time that they have done.
So comparison tools are essential for this kind of project,
allowing you to look at the telemetry
that's coming off of, say, Lewis Hamilton's car and Charles Leclerc’s car
and seeing well, is Charles braking a little bit earlier.
Is Lewis maybe up shifting a little bit earlier?
And where the performance is being or where lap time is being gained or lost?
As I said earlier, the intention behind this project is to give the user
as much insight into the data behind Formula 1 as we possibly can.
Basically, like giving the user their own pit wall at home.
So I have so many ideas for features and I'm sure that you do too.
How to contribute
If you would like to get involved with the project,
or try building out one of these features that I've listed,
or maybe even a feature that you have an idea for yourself,
please do download the code, make some changes, and maybe
even submit a pull request to hopefully see your code in the main branch.
Outro
So I hope you've enjoyed this deeper dive into the F1 Race
Replay project, and I hope you're excited to see how the project progresses.
If you are, please do follow me on my other channels
to keep up to date with everything that's happening.